doc: Add Ansys Fluent QoI-based workflow example (#399)
pasteurlabs/tesseract-core: demo/showcase/ansys-qoi/forum.md

     - 3.1.3 [Tesseract Components](#313-tesseract-components)
     - 3.1.4 [Putting them all together](#314-putting-them-all-together)
   - 3.2 [But... Why use Tesseracts?](#32-but-why-use-tesseracts)

4. [Results](#4-results)

5. [Outlook](#5-outlook)

**Annex**
- A. [Annex - QoI Surrogate Model](#a-annex---qoi-surrogate-model)
  - A.1 [Dataset Preparation](#a1-dataset-preparation)
  - A.2 [QoI Model Architecture](#a2-qoi-model-architecture)

Engineers iterate over their designs to meet specific requirements, which are metrics that translate directly into product performance or business needs. We call these metrics Quantities of Interest (QoI). In many engineering contexts, engineers extract QoI as post-processed metrics from simulation solutions. For example, CFD simulations of a wing compute lift and drag coefficients as QoI. Engineering workflows involve iterative updates over design variables (like CAD parameters and boundary conditions) to achieve the required design performance. 

This showcase demonstrates how Tesseract and Ansys Fluent work together to extract insights from QoI datasets. In particular, we will cover:

> 1. How to assemble an internal aerodynamics dataset with QoI metrics, based on Ansys simulations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. How to assemble an internal aerodynamics dataset, based on Ansys simulations, mapping CAD parameters and boundary conditions to QoI. 
```

In general, I would avoid QoI metrics, since before you rightfully stated that metrics are QoI in this post.

![alt text](images/duct_1.png)
- One baffle place is located just after the inlet acting as a flow constrainer
- The second baffle plate is in the intersection between duct branches and redirects the inlet flow

### 1.1 Dataset Variations

**CAD Variations**

Four geometric parameters were modified to explore different duct configurations:
- `d61`: Angle of the middle baffle plate
- `d72`: Aperture length of the inlet baffle plate
- `d13`: Angle between duct branches
- `d34`: Curvature angle of the duct branch

<table> <tr> <td align="center"> <img src="images/d13.png" alt="d13" width="400"/><br/> <b>d13:</b> Angle between duct branches </td> <td align="center"> <img src="images/d34.png" alt="d34" width="400"/><br/> <b>d34:</b> Curvature angle of duct branch </td> </tr> <tr> <td align="center"> <img src="images/d61.png" alt="d61" width="400"/><br/> <b>d61:</b> Angle of middle baffle plate </td> <td align="center"> <img src="images/d72.png" alt="d72" width="400"/><br/> <b>d72:</b> Aperture length of inlet baffle </td> </tr> </table>

> **Boundary Condition Variations**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Boundary conditions**
```

The team also varied the inlet velocity magnitude across simulations to capture different flow regimes and operating conditions.

### 1.2. QoI
Although the dataset simulations were generated before thinking of any QoI workflow, a text file containing static pressure values averaged at certain stations was dumped as part of the reporting. This static pressure values will be considered as the base QoI of the simulation, although we will also explore how to define additional metrics based on these QoI (e.g. $\Delta p$). 

> The static pressure values reported are averaged at 4 different sections: `inlet`, `outlet`, `p2-plane` (YZ plane after inlet baffle plane) and `p3-plane` (YZ plane before middle baffle plane)

Reviewer: It's not clear to me if the QoI-based surrogate model learns the static pressure values or the deltas. I would clarify this aspect a bit more.

Reviewer: That works, thanks!

    <th style="border: none; border-bottom: 2px solid #ddd; padding: 8px;"><b>Base QoI</b></th>
  </tr>
  <tr style="border: none;">
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;"><code>d61</code>: Angle of middle baffle plate</td>
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;">Inlet velocity</td>
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;">Static pressure inlet</td>
  </tr>
  <tr style="border: none;">
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;"><code>d72</code>: Aperture length of inlet baffle plate</td>
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;"></td>
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;">Static pressure outlet</td>
  </tr>
  <tr style="border: none;">
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;"><code>d13</code>: Angle between ducts</td>
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;"></td>
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;">Static pressure p2-plane</td>
  </tr>
  <tr style="border: none;">
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;"><code>d34</code>: Curvature angle of duct branch</td>
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;"></td>
    <td style="border: none; padding: 8px;">Static pressure p3-plane</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## 2. QoI Workflows 

> Understanding how geometry design impacts QoI is of valuable interest for CAD and simulation engineers. Establishing a workflow that directly maps a CAD file (e.g. .stl) to QoI removes the need for meshing, simulation, and post-processing. This enables significant reductions in engineering time and accelerates design iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Understanding how geometry design impacts QoI is of valuable interest for CAD and simulation engineers. Establishing a workflow that directly maps a CAD file (e.g. .stl) to QoI removes the need for meshing, simulation, and post-processing. This enables a significant reduction in engineering time and accelerates design iteration.
```

In [the following section](#3-ansys-tesseract-qoi-workflow-proposal) we will outline how Tesseracts are able to define a workflow on top of Ansys simulations and mention the benefits it provides. But first, let's explore some of the possibilities to define QoI workflows.

### 2.1. CAD Geometry + Boundary Conditions -> QoI Workflow
<p align="center">
  <img src="images/qoi_overview.png">
</p>

This workflow enables engineers to directly predict QoI from CAD geometry and boundary conditions. The workflow illustrated above has been selected for this demonstration as it integrates methods that can be deployed during early-stage design and do not require highly complex neural network architectures. This ensures that the proposed solutions remain practical, maintainable, and aligned with typical engineering development cycles.

### 2.2. CAD Geometry + Boundary Conditions -> Full-Field -> QoI Workflow
<p align="center">
  <img src="images/qoi_overview_full.png">
</p>

> Engineers can also incorporate a full-field surrogate model into an alternative QoI workflow alongside direct CAD-to-QoI prediction. When a surrogate predictor generates full-field outputs (e.g., pressure distribution, temperature fields, stress contours), the QoI can be directly derived from these fields using standard post-processing tools. However, deploying a full-field surrogate introduces additional complexity and may not deliver significant benefits for early-stage design studies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Engineers can also incorporate a full-field surrogate model into an alternative QoI-based workflow alongside direct CAD-to-QoI predictions. When a surrogate model generates full-field outputs (e.g., pressure distributions, temperature fields, stress contours), different QoI can be directly derived from these fields using standard post-processing tools. However, deploying a full-field surrogate model introduces additional complexity and may not deliver significant benefits for early-stage design studies.
```

## 3. Ansys<->Tesseract QoI Workflow Proposal
We can use Tesseracts to define modular and reusable components that orchestrate the QoI workflow on top of the Ansys HVAC simulations. The diagram below shows an approach to perform training an inference on a QoI surrogate model that maps CAD geometry files and boundary conditions to QoI  (see [reference](#21-cad-geometry--boundary-conditions---qoi-workflow)) with Tesseracts.

![alt text](images/tesseract_wf.png)

To enable QoI prediction directly from CAD files and boundary conditions, engineers must first train a model. With this Tesseract architecture we can define two complementary workflows, a training workflow that learns from historical Ansys simulations, and an inference workflow that predicts QoI for new CAD designs.

### 3.1. Tesseract Workflows and Components
#### 3.1.1 Training Workflow
The training workflow consists of two key Tesseract components: 
- **Dataset Pre-Processing Tesseract**: Extracts and formats data from Ansys simulation runs. This component samples geometry (point clouds in this case) and extracts the critical information downstream components need: boundary conditions and QoI values from each simulation. 

> - **Training Tesseract**: Consumes the processed dataset and defines a training loop to tune the QoI model's weights, learning the relationship between geometry, boundary conditions, and performance outcomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Training Tesseract**: Consumes the processed dataset and defines a training loop to tune the QoI-based surrogate model, learning the functional mapping between HVAC geometries, boundary conditions, and simulated QoI, namely pressure drops.
```

#### 3.1.2. Inference Workflow

> The inference workflow enables engineers to predict QoI using only CAD geometry and boundary condition parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inference workflow enables engineers to predict QoI using only CAD geometries and boundary conditions.
```

### 3.1. Tesseract Workflows and Components
#### 3.1.1 Tesseract Components
##### TODO: SMALL INTRO TO TESSERACT COMPONENT? AND BENEFITS

**Dataset Tesseract**
```python
class InputSchema(BaseModel):
    config: InputFileReference = Field(description="Configuration file")
    sim_folder: str | Path = Field(
        description="Folder path containing Ansys Fluent simulations with CAD files and QoI reports",
    )
    dataset_folder: str | Path = Field(
        description="Folder path where pre-processed simulations will be dumped into"
    )
```
```python
class OutputSchema(BaseModel):
    data: list[OutputFileReference] = Field(
        description="List of npz files containing List of npz files containing point-cloud data information,  simulation parameters and QoIs",
    )
```
**Training Tesseract**
```python
class InputSchema(BaseModel):
    config: InputFileReference = Field(description="Configuration file")
    data: list[str] = Field(

>         description="List of npz files containing List of npz files containing point-cloud data information,  simulation parameters and QoIs"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        description="List of npz files containing point cloud data, simulation parameters and QoI"
```
Since QoI is quantiti**es** of interest, I would always use this rather than QoIs.

    )
```
```python
class OutputSchema(BaseModel):
    trained_models: list[OutputFileReference] = Field(
        description="Pickle file containing weights of trained model"
    )
    scalers: list[OutputFileReference] = Field(
        description="Pickle file containing the scaling method for the dataset"
    )
```
**Inference Tesseract**
```python
class InputSchema(BaseModel):
    config: InputFileReference = Field(description="Configuration file")
    data: list[str | Path] = Field(

>         description="List of npz files containing point-cloud data information and simulation parameters"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        description="List of npz files containing point cloud data and simulation parameters"
```

- **Training Tesseract**: Consumes the processed dataset and defines a training loop to tune the QoI-based surrogate model, learning the functional mapping between HVAC geometries, boundary conditions, and simulated QoI.
#### 3.1.3. Tesseract Inference Workflow
The inference workflow enables engineers to predict QoI using only CAD geometry files and boundary conditions.

This workflow consists of:
- **Dataset Pre-Processing Tesseract**: Ensures data format compatibility with the trained model.
- **Inference Tesseract**: Feeds the pre-processed data into the trained model to predict QoI.

## 4. Results

Before examining the results, we need to understand how the Ansys Fluent simulations are transformed into a dataset suitable for training the QoI-based surrogate model. This preprocessing pipeline extracts and structures the relevant information from raw simulation outputs, converting them into machine-learning-ready inputs. Below we provide a brief overview of the elements of the dataset created, although a more detailed explanation is available in [Appendix A.1.](#a1-dataset-preparation):

> - Point-Cloud points and normals: correspond to the (x, y, z) coordinates and (nx, ny, nz) normal unit vectors of the point-cloud sampling performed over the CAD geometry file (STL)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Point cloud vertices and normals: correspond to the (x, y, z) coordinates and (nx, ny, nz) normal unit vectors of the point cloud sampling performed over the CAD geometry file (STL)
```
Sometimes stl is written as stl and some others as STL. I would make it uniform.

> - Point-Cloud-derived parameters: represent geometric metrics that are not explicitly available from the STL file but can be directly computed from the sampled points

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Point cloud-derived parameters: represent geometric values that are not explicitly available from the STL file but can be directly computed from the sampled points
```

- CAD parameters: correspond to the mentioned CAD sketch parameters (`d61`, `d72`, `d13`, `d34`)
- Boundary conditions: inlet velocity of the HVAC duct 

> - QoI: averaged static pressure values at 4 stations (`inlet`, `outlet`, `p2-plane`, `p3-plane`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- QoI: averaged static pressure values at 4 slices (`inlet`, `outlet`, `p2-plane`, `p3-plane`)
```
I don't have a strong preference here, but I would use slices rather than stations across the board. Please lmk if I am lacking some technical terminology here!

![alt text](images/full_model.png)

> The proposed model performs a shape embedding over the sampled points and normals, then concatenates this representation with the boundary conditions, point-cloud-derived parameters, and CAD parameters. These combined inputs are passed to a regressor (such as a simple Random Forest) to predict the QoI. More information on the architecture and variations of it can be found in [Appendix A.2.](#a2-model-architecture)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed model performs a shape embedding over the sampled points and normals, then concatenates this representation with the boundary conditions, point cloud-derived parameters, and CAD parameters. These combined inputs are passed to a regressor (such as a simple Random Forest) to predict the QoI. More information on the model architectures can be found in [Appendix A.2.](#a2-model-architecture)
```

> The metrics of the architecture proposed for the QoI-based surrogate model have been extracted for an unseen dataset of 31 samples. 

Reviewer: I would specify a bit better the final architecture used to produce these metrics in the previous paragraph.

```
"test_metrics": {
  "r2": 0.9559590920924331,
  "nmse": 0.04404090592149448,
  "nrmse": 0.20985925815702633,
  "nmae": 0.07607935409954629
}
```
The figures collectively indicate a reliable QoI predictions, especially considering that this model would be of special interest for early design phase and rapid design exploration.

> An alternative architectures to the one proposed and benchmarks can be found in [Appendix A.2.](#a2-model-architecture). This specific QoI-based surrogate model is trained without any CAD parameters as input. This scenario represents situations where the original CAD sketches used to generate the STL files have been lost (a common occurrence when design traceability is poorly maintained or when multiple CAD softwares are used).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative architecture to the one proposed here and related benchmarks can be found in [Appendix A.2.](#a2-model-architecture). This specific QoI-based surrogate model is trained without any CAD parameters as input. This scenario represents situations where the original CAD parameters used to generate the STL files have been lost (a common occurrence when design traceability is poorly maintained or when multiple CAD softwares are used).
```

## 5. Outlook
## Appendix
### A. QoI-based Surrogate Model
#### A.1. Dataset Preparation
Referring back to the HVAC duct dataset introduced earlier, for each of the Ansys simulation runs the following files are present: a CAD geometry file (`duct_baffle.stl`), Ansys Fluent mesh discretization file (`duct_baffle.msh.h5`), Ansys Fluent solver case file (`duct_baffle.cas.h5`) and results data file (`duct_baffle.dat.h5`), a static pressure report (`all_pressure.txt`) and a file containing the CAD parameters and boundary conditions variations performed (`metadata.json.series`).
```
Experiment_0
|-duct_baffle.stl
|-duct_baffle.msh.h5
|-duct_baffle.cas.h5
|-duct_baffle.dat.h5
|-metadata.json.series
|-all_pressure.txt
```
A critical part for training a QoI-based surrogate model is the extraction of features from the available simulations. The following paragraphs describe the feature-extraction process in detail.
##### CAD Geometry File Pre-Processing

> Although several pre-processing strategies can be used to convert CAD geometry files into machine-learning-ready inputs (e.g. voxelization, signed distance fields, graph-based representations…) this showcase adopts a point-cloud representation as it offers a good balance between geometric fidelity and implementation simplicity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although several pre-processing strategies can be used to convert CAD geometry files into ML-ready data (e.g. voxelization, signed distance fields, graph-based representations…) this showcase adopts a point cloud-based representation as it offers a good balance between geometric fidelity and implementation simplicity. 
```

> *Point-Cloud Sampling (Points & Normals)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Point cloud sampling (points & normals)*
```

Point-cloud sampling retrieves both point coordinates and their normals.

Similar to the Ansys Meshing feature “Sphere of Influence” (referred to as SoI in the images), the implemented code is able to increase the sampling density in targeted regions. Since the baffle plates represent a relevant area of the CAD design, spheres of influence around these areas can be defined. 
<table>
  <tr>

>     <td align="center">

Reviewer: I think that some of the new images are missing.

```
"test_metrics": {
  "r2": 0.9045070139578009,
  "nmse": 0.09549298173583969,
  "nrmse": 0.3090193954276475,
  "nmae": 0.11722269859289076
}
```

Despite not using some key information such as the building CAD parameters, the shape embedder is able to extract geometric information from the STL (although not reaching the metrics of the baseline model). 

![alt text](images/latent.png)

When looking at the latent space of the shape embedding block, we can see;
- The middle baffle plate angle (d61) shows strong correlation with the principal latent dimensions, indicating that the embedding architecture is able to effectively capture it.

- The angle between ducts (d13) show a partial representation within the latent space, suggesting that it is not captured as well as d61

- The inlet aperture length (d72) and the curvature angle of the duct branch (d34) presence is limited in the latent representation. 

> It is important to remark the shape embedder is trained together with the QoI-based regressor, meaning that even though the embedder architecture only processes point clouds, the training step is done so that together with the vector `p` it helps predict the QoI `q`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to remark that the shape embedder is trained together with the QoI-based regressor, meaning that even though the embedder architecture only processes point clouds, the training step is done so that together with the vector `p` it helps predict the QoI `q`.
```

> > 📝 **Note:** These architecture represents an initial baseline representation rather than an optimized solution. The primary objective of this showcase is to establish an end-to-end workflow from geometry embedding through QoI prediction, demonstrating technical feasibility. Subsequent iterations can evaluate alternative embedding techniques (voxelization, SDF or GNN), feature fusion methods in the integration of `z` and `p`, or alternative architectures to replace Random Forests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 📝 **Note:** These architecture represents an initial baseline representation rather than a globally optimized solution. The primary objective of this showcase is to establish an end-to-end workflow from geometry embedding through QoI predictions, demonstrating technical feasibility. Subsequent iterations can evaluate alternative embedding techniques (voxelization, signed distance functions or graph-based representations), feature fusion methods in the integration of `z` and `p`, or alternative architectures to replace Random Forests.
```

## 3. Ansys<->Tesseract QoI Workflow Proposal
We can use Tesseract to define modular and reusable components that orchestrate the QoI-based workflows on top of the Ansys Fluent simulations based on HVAC systems. The diagram below shows an approach to perform training and inference on a QoI-based surrogate model that maps CAD geometries and boundary conditions to QoI  (see [reference](#21-cad-geometry--boundary-conditions---qoi-workflow)) with Tesseract.

![alt text](images/tesseract_wf.png)

To enable QoI-based predictions directly from CAD geometries and boundary conditions, we first need to train a surrogate model. With Tesseract, we can define two complementary workflows: a training workflow where the surrogate model learns from historical Ansys Fluent simulation data, and an inference workflow where the surrogate model predicts QoI for a new CAD geometry file and boundary conditions.

> ### 3.1. Tesseract Workflows and Components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.1. Tesseract orchestration
```

#### 3.1.1 Tesseract Components

> Tesseract Components offer significant advantages for these types of problems. They encapsulate dependecy management, eliminating the complexity of handling dependencies. This is particularly valuable in the rapidly evolving landscape of geometric deep-learning or CAD processing libraries. Additionally, Tesseract Components are deployment-ready by design, enabling seamless transition from prototype to production pipeline. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tesseract Components offer significant advantages for these types of problems. They encapsulate the required packages, eliminating the complexity of handling several dependencies across the pipeline. This is particularly valuable in the rapidly evolving landscape of geometric deep-learning or CAD processing libraries. Additionally, Tesseract components are deployment-ready by design, enabling seamless transition from prototype to production pipeline. 
```
In general Tesseract is the only thing that requires capital T always (e.g., Tesseract Component should become Tesseract component).

*Point-Cloud Sampling (Points & Normals)*

Point-cloud sampling retrieves both point coordinates and their normals.

Similar to the Ansys Meshing feature “Sphere of Influence” (referred to as SoI in the images), the implemented code is able to increase the sampling density in targeted regions. Since the baffle plates represent a relevant area of the CAD design, spheres of influence around these areas can be defined.
<table>
  <tr>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="images/poisson_sampling.png" alt="Image 1" height="150"/><br/>
      <b></b> Poisson sampling (2048 pts)
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="images/poisson_soi.png" alt="Image 2" height="150"/><br/>
      <b></b> Poisson sampling with SoI (2048 pts)
    </td>
    <td align="center">
      <img src="images/poisson_plus_soi.png" alt="Image 3" height="150"/><br/>
      <b></b> Poisson sampling with SoI (4096 pts)
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

The `config.yaml` contains the parameters used to control the pre-processing of CAD geometry files, including the configuration of different point-cloud sampling techniques.

> *Point-Cloud Derived Parameters*

Reviewer: Same here

- Optional components (model-variant dependent):

   - Point-cloud derived parameters `["min", "max", "size", "diag", "max_side", "centroid"]`

   - CAD parameters `["d61", "d72", "d13", "d34"]`, either in full or as a subset

Following concatenation of the parameter vector `p` with the shape embedding `z`, various architectures can be attached to predict the QoI vector `q`. As illustrated in the figure below, this showcase employs a Random Forest (RF) regressor in the prediction block due to its straightforward implementation and robust performance characteristics.

![alt text](images/full_model.png)

The shape embedder employs a PointNet-based embedder for processing the 3D point cloud data. It was chosen for its simplicity and effectivenes with small dataset. This follows a three-stage architecture:
1. Point-wise Feature Extraction: a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) processes each point independently, extracting local features from coordinates and normals.
2. Global Feature Aggregation: Max pooling aggregates point-wise features.
3. Latent Space Projection: a fully connected MLP projects the global features into a lower-dimensional latent representation.

> More sophisticated point cloud embedders such as PointNeXt and PointBERT were evaluated during model development. However, these architectures demonstrated reduced performance on our dataset, likely due to their increased complexity and parameter count being poorly suited for the limited training data available. 

Reviewer: Some references to the PointNeXt, PointBERT and PointNet papers should be added here.

Reviewer: Also, I would say `...for the small training data`.

```
"test_metrics": {
  "r2": 0.9045070139578009,
  "nmse": 0.09549298173583969,
  "nrmse": 0.3090193954276475,
  "nmae": 0.11722269859289076
}
```

Despite not using some key information such as the building CAD parameters, the shape embedder is able to extract geometric information from the STL (although not reaching the metrics of the baseline model).

![alt text](images/latent.png)

When looking at the latent space of the shape embedding block, we can see;
- The middle baffle plate angle (d61) shows strong correlation with the principal latent dimensions, indicating that the embedding architecture is able to effectively capture it.

- The angle between ducts (d13) show a partial representation within the latent space, suggesting that it is not captured as well as d61

- The inlet aperture length (d72) and the curvature angle of the duct branch (d34) presence is limited in the latent representation.

It is important to remark the shape embedder is trained together with the QoI-based regressor, meaning that even though the embedder architecture only processes point clouds, the training step is done so that together with the vector `p` it helps predict the QoI `q`.

> > 📝 **Note:** These architecture represents an initial baseline representation rather than an optimized solution. The primary objective of this showcase is to establish an end-to-end workflow from geometry embedding through QoI prediction, demonstrating technical feasibility. Subsequent iterations can evaluate alternative embedding techniques (voxelization, SDF or GNN), feature fusion methods in the integration of `z` and `p`, or alternative architectures to replace Random Forests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 📝 **Note:** These architecture represents an initial baseline representation rather than an optimized solution. The primary objective of this showcase is to establish an end-to-end workflow from geometry embedding through QoI prediction, demonstrating technical feasibility. Subsequent iterations can evaluate alternative embedding techniques (voxelization, signed distance functions or graph-based representations), feature fusion methods in the integration of `z` and `p`, or alternative architectures to replace Random Forests.
```
We should not keep SDFs and GNNs since we didn't introduce these acronyms before. Furthermore, I think we are referring to the graph representations (with connectivity) rather than graph neural network here.
